JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President-elect
Trump announces his pick for
secretary of
defense.
We take a close look at retired
Marine General
James Mattis' background.
Then: As a deadline looms for
protesters,
pressure mounts at the site of
the Dakota
pipeline, where clashes with
police have been
ongoing.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II, Chairman,
Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe: The way I look at
it is, as long
as the pipeline isn't under the
river, there's
still a chance, there's still
hope.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
analyze this
week's Trump transition moves
and the Democrats'
discontent.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President-elect
Trump filled
up another Cabinet seat, while
some of his
supporters aggressively
challenged recount
efforts in three states.
The "NewsHour"'s John Yang has
our report.
DONALD TRUMP (R),
President-Elect: We are
going to appoint "Mad Dog"
Mattis as our secretary
of defense.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: But we're not
announcing it
until Monday, so don't tell
anybody.
JOHN YANG: President-elect Trump
scooped himself
Thursday night, making his
choice public in
Cincinnati, the first stop of
his thank you
tour.
He met with retired General
James Mattis last
month in New Jersey.
DONALD TRUMP: He is the real
deal.
He is the real deal.
JOHN YANG: Mattis retired as a
four-star general
three years ago, after four
decades as a Marine.
He headed U.S. Central Command
until 2013,
in charge of operations in Iraq
and Afghanistan.
He would need a special
congressional waiver,
because federal law says a
defense secretary
has be out of uniform for at
least seven years.
In Cincinnati, Mr. Trump pledged
to ease still
simmering post-election
tensions.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
bring our country
together, all of our country.
We're going to find common
ground and we will
get the job done properly.
We will get it done properly.
JOHN YANG: But at Harvard
University, top
officials of his campaign
clashed with Clinton
campaign managers at a normally
civil post-election
review.
Clinton aides said the Trump
campaign fueled
racism.
JENNIFER PALMIERI, Democratic
Strategist:
I would rather lose than win the
way you did.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, Trump Senior
Adviser: Do
you think I ran a campaign where
white supremacists
had a platform?
Are you going to look me in the
face and tell
me that?
JENNIFER PALMIERI: It did.
Kellyanne, it did.
(CROSSTALK)
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Do you think
you could have
just had a decent message for
the white working-class
voters?
JOHN YANG: There were also
sparks when Clinton
aides noted that their candidate
won more
votes than the president-elect.
JOEL BENENSON, Former Hillary
Clinton Campaign
Adviser: You guys won.
That's clear, you won the
Electoral College.
That's the currency.
(CROSSTALK)
JOEL BENENSON: But let's also be
honest.
Don't act as if you have some
popular mandate
for your message.
The fact of the matter is, is
that more Americans
voted for Hillary Clinton than
Donald Trump.
KELLYANNE CONWAY: Hey, guys.
We won.
You don't have to respond.
I mean, seriously.
JOHN YANG: Today, Trump
supporters moved to
block recounts in Wisconsin,
Pennsylvania
and Michigan.
The president-elect was in New
York today,
meeting with longtime supporters
Republican
Senator David Perdue of Georgia
and former
U.N. Ambassador John Bolton.
His schedule also included an
unusual suspect,
Senator Heidi Heitkamp of North
Dakota, a
Democrat.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will have much
more on the
Mattis pick right after this
news summary.
And late today, the transition
team reported
that president-elect Trump spoke
by phone
with the president of Taiwan.
It is a highly unusual move.
The U.S. cut formal diplomatic
ties with Taiwan
in 1979.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. economy
posted solid job growth for
November, with
the unemployment rate hitting a
nine-year
low.
The Labor Department reported
U.S. employers
added about 178,000 jobs, and
the unemployment
rate dropped to 4.6 percent,
largely because
many people stopped looking for
work.
Stocks were mostly flat on Wall
Street today,
in spite the
better-than-expected jobs
report,
but crude oil prices posted
their biggest
weekly gain since February of
2011.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 21 points
to close at 19170.
The Nasdaq rose four points, and
the S&P 500
added less than a point.
For the week, the Dow gained a
fraction of
a percent, the Nasdaq fell
nearly 3 percent,
and the S&P 500 slipped 1
percent.
House lawmakers overwhelmingly
backed a nearly
$619 billion bipartisan defense
bill today.
It will give U.S. troops their
biggest pay
raise since 2010.
It also prohibits the Pentagon
from closing
military bases and the prison at
Guantanamo
Bay.
While most members of Congress
supported the
bill, some criticized it for
including over
$3 billion more in war funding
than last year's
budget.
MAN: It stops the troop
reductions in our
armed forces, thereby increasing
readiness
while reducing stress and strain
on our force
and the families.
REP.
BARBARA LEE (D), California:
Enough is enough.
Instead of writing blank checks
to the Pentagon,
Congress needs to live up to its
constitutional
obligation to debate matters of
war and peace.
We need to rip up the 2001 blank
check for
endless war.
We need to stop funding wars
without end with
no debate on the cost and
consequences to
our troops or to the American
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Senate is
expected to vote
on the bill next week.
Officials in Gatlinburg,
Tennessee, today
raised the death toll from days
of fierce
wildfires to 13 people.
Thousands of residents also
returned home
for the first time to survey the
extent of
the devastation.
Officials said the number of
damaged homes
and buildings is now close to
1,000.
In Indonesia, 200,000 people
flooded Jakarta
today to protest against the
city's Christian
governor, who is being
prosecuted for allegedly
insulting the Koran.
The sea of conservative Muslim
demonstrators
gathered peacefully to demand
the governor
be jailed for blasphemy.
Ten people were arrested by
police, who accused
the dissenters of using the
protest to overthrow
the government.
And Ford Motor Company is
recalling more than
680,000 vehicles for potentially
faulty seat
belts.
The recall affects its mid-size
sedans, like
the Ford Fusion and Lincoln MKZ,
that were
mostly sold in the U.S.
The automaker says the seat
belts might not
restrain passengers in a crash.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
who is "Mad
Dog" Mattis, Trump's choice to
head the Defense
Department?; Dakota pipeline
protesters facing
a deadline to clear out; Cubans
think back
on Fidel Castro's legacy; and
much more.
So, who is the man
president-elect Trump has
picked to be his secretary of
defense?
What's his track record, and how
does he think
the United States should
confront the threats
that it faces?
For that, we turn to two who
know retired
General James Mattis well.
Steve Simon was the senior
director for Middle
Eastern and North African
affairs on the National
Security Council staff during
the Obama administration.
He's now a visiting professor of
history at
Amherst College.
And Michael Gordon, he has
covered General
Mattis as a reporter at The New
York Times.
For years, Gordon covered the
Pentagon, and
now the State Department.
And we welcome both of you to
the "NewsHour."
Let me start with you, Michael
Gordon.
Tell us what you know about
James Mattis,
beyond what we reported a moment
ago.
MICHAEL GORDON, Diplomatic
Correspondent,
The New York Times: Well, he's
certainly an
unconventional choice for
secretary of defense,
simply because he's only been
out of the military
for three years.
He's been a Marine in some of
the -- a Marine
commander in the hottest wars
that we have
had over the past 10 years,
Iraq, Afghanistan,
and ran the Central Command,
which oversees
both those wars.
And that's a position that also
involved him
with a lot of diplomacy in the
region, I think.
But he's famous also for a lot
of his Mattis-isms,
his kind of sayings.
I remember, when I was in
Barwana, Iraq, there
was a sign on one of the
outposts that said,
"Be polite, be professional,
have a plan to
kill everyone you meet."
I mean, that pretty much
expresses I think
Mattis' approach.
He was prepared to use violence
to achieve
ends in war, but he also sought
to work with
the population and to, you know,
constrain
the violence as much as
possible, which wasn't
always easy in an environment
like Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steve Simon, what
would you
add to that, and where did this
nickname "Mad
Dog" come from?
STEVE SIMON, Former National
Security Council
Official: Well, look, I have
never seen him
in combat, so I don't know how
mad a dog he
can be, but certainly in his
capacity as commander
and as a senior U.S. official
dealing with
national security issues, I
never saw him
as anything less than
self-possessed and having
a cool head.
So, I'm not really sure where
that epithet
comes from.
He's also known by soldiers who
worked with
him and for him as the warrior
monk because
he does have a somewhat monkish
temperament.
You know, he's in some ways
really into, you
know, self-denial and focusing
on his troops.
And that has won him a great
deal of loyalty,
which will stand him in good
stead if he's
confirmed by Congress as
secretary of defense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael Gordon,
you said a
moment ago he's prepared to use
violence,
even as he cares about the
troops.
And as a leader, one would
expect that he
would.
But what is his view of the role
of the military
in carrying out foreign policy?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, as Steve
pointed out,
he's not a one-sided person.
Every military person has to
execute military
operations, which means you have
to fight.
And fight to Baghdad or fighting
in Afghanistan,
all these environments wasn't
easy.
And he's also famous of his
study of military
history, his thousands of books,
the fact
that he claims not to own a
television.
That's where the warrior monk
comes from.
But he has some views on foreign
policy that
really put him, I think, in the
mainstream.
For example, he doesn't want to
rip up the
Iran agreement.
He's criticized the agreement.
He said he wished it would
impose stricter
constraints on Iran's nuclear
program.
But he said just walking away
from it would
work against American interests,
that the
allies would never go along with
that.
He's against torture.
And president-elect Trump has
remarked on
that.
He has argued against using
He argues that it's simply not
effective.
And he's wary of Russia, which,
you know,
president-elect Trump, at times,
has implied
that he's sympathetic with
Vladimir Putin
or might want to work together
with Vladimir
Putin in Syria.
I think Mattis would be
extremely skeptical
of that kind of approach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, fill in
more of that
picture, Steve Simon.
How do you see Mattis aligning
with what we
know of what Donald Trump
thinks?
STEVE SIMON: Well, he's a bit of
an awkward
fit, primarily, I think, because
he does support
U.S. compliance with the deal
negotiated with
Iran to contain its nuclear
program and to
block its pathway towards a
bomb.
He has referred to it as
providing what he's
called a nuclear pause, but not
a nuclear
halt, and said, in effect, a
pause is better
than nothing.
Where he does differ, I think,
from the outgoing
administration is his view that,
even as the
United States maintains its
commitment to
the deal it negotiated, that it
pushes back
on Iran's regional maneuvers.
And I think, and, by that, Jim
Mattis would
point to do things.
One is Syria, where the Iranians
are very,
very deeply involved.
And the other is in Iraq, where
the Iranians
gained a great deal of influence
after the
U.S. overthrew the regime of
Saddam Hussein.
And I think, as commander of
Central Command,
General Mattis is probably quite
sensitive
to the fact that many of the
deaths of U.S.
servicemen in Iraq were
attributable to weapons
designed or provided by Iran.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about --
Michael Gordon,
people are talking, of course,
about the fact
that he's going to -- if he's
confirmed, he's
going to have to have this
exemption from
the law that says military
people who are
few than seven years out of the
military can't
be secretary of defense.
How do you see him running that
department,
coming from the military?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, first of
all, I think
the waiver will go through.
Senator McCain, who chairs the
Armed Services
Committee, has said he supports
it.
Senator Gillibrand said she
opposes it, but
I thinks he has sufficient
support.
I think that he has enough
experience running
large organizations, running the
Central Command.
He ran the Joint Forces command.
That requires a certain amount
of bureaucratic
capability and finesse.
So I think he, in his own mind,
understands
-- I mean, he would be the first
person since
George Marshall to do this --
that there is
a responsibility on him to try
to run the
department as a civilian that
he's only been
for three years and not as a
military man.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steve Simon, how
do you see
that?
Because there has been this
tradition -- it's
in law -- that someone who's
been in the military
recently shouldn't be running
the Pentagon.
How do you see him fitting into
that?
STEVE SIMON: Well, look, he's
going to have
to deal with issues that he
hasn't had to
deal with as a combatant
commander or a unified
commander, R&D, weapons
acquisition, large-scale
budget issues, you know,
personnel issues
of an immense scale.
In addition to being a
politician in his dealing
with Congress in particular,
he's going to
have to learn how to deal
effectively with
a White House staff.
That can be a challenge,
especially in an
administration like the one
that's shaping
up, I think.
And he's going to have to be a
diplomat as
well.
Now, I have seen him work in a
diplomatic
mode, and I think he's gifted in
that domain.
I don't think he's going to have
a problem
there.
So, all in all, you know, I
would say that
he has good prospects for
success.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steve Simon,
Michael Gordon,
as we learn who General James
Mattis is, and
he heads for confirmation, thank
you very
much.
MICHAEL GORDON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even as
temperatures in North
Dakota are plunging into the
single digits,
the fight over the Dakota Access
oil pipeline
is only intensifying.
William Brangham is here with
more.
So, William, I understand
there's a deadline
coming?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right,
Judy.
Starting on Monday, anyone at
that large protest
camp in North Dakota will be
considered trespassers
and could be arrested.
That's according to the U.S.
Army Corps of
Engineers.
For months now, thousands of
people calling
themselves water protectors have
gathered
to stop the pipeline.
They say it's destroying lands
that are sacred
to the Standing Rock Sioux, and
that an oil
leak could threaten the tribe's
water.
Despite the Army Corps' order,
and a similar
one from the governor,
protesters say they're
not going anywhere.
Dave Archambault II is the
chairman of the
Standing Rock Sioux.
I spoke with him earlier today,
and I asked,
with the deadline looming, and
reports of
2,000 veterans traveling to
North Dakota to
support the protesters, did he
fear Monday
could get out of hand?
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II, Chairman,
Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe: No, I don't.
I don't believe that anything
will happen.
I believe that the Corps of
Engineers is not
going to come in with force, and
I don't think
the state government is going to
come with
force.
And I know that the veterans are
coming to
stand with peace and prayer.
Their presence is symbolic.
It's representing the men and
women who fought
for this nation's freedom.
And they're coming here to let
the nation
know that it's not right to
treat indigenous
peoples, to treat tribes in this
way.
We have to start listening to
tribes.
That's very symbolic for us to
know that our
veterans, the ones who fought
for this nation,
are coming.
And it's not to -- they're not
coming to start
a war.
They're coming to let the world
know that
they, too, stand with us.
And December 5, it's not going
to be a showdown.
It's just going to be another
day.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, if
protesters do stay
there, I mean, the governor and
many others
have said that it is just not
safe with subzero
temperatures being out there to
sleep out
on the plains like this.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II: My comment
to that is
that it's not safe for law
enforcement to
spray water on water protectors
in subzero,
subfreezing temperatures.
That's not safe.
It's not safe to fire concussion
grenades
at crowds.
It's not safe to fire rubber
bullets and target
people's heads.
That's not safe.
People are there, and they are
ready for this.
They knew that winter was
coming.
They have some temporary
shelters that are
very insulated and warm, and
they are taking
care of each other.
They know how to check on each
other, and
they know what to do in case of
an emergency.
So, it is a safe place for
individuals to
gather and pray.
What is not safe is the way law
enforcement
has been using aggression and
weapons on unarmed
people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We spoke a few
weeks ago
with the CEO of the company that
is building
this pipeline, and he argues
that your concerns
over a leak into your water
supply are overblown.
He said, this is going to be
brand-new pipeline,
state-of-the-art, all safety
measures, and
that you need not worry as much
as you seem
to be.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II: And I
understand where
he's coming from.
And if that's the case, then why
not put it
north of Bismarck, North Dakota?
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's where
it was originally
going to go.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II: Right.
If the safeguards are all there,
then it can
still go there.
He will say that it can't go
there because
of the population of the
community, the environmental
impacts, the sacred sites that
are there,
the wetlands that it has to
cross.
These are all the same concerns
that we have.
It's just that we are a lot --
the numbers
show that we're a lot fewer.
And so if the pipeline -- and if
there is
no worry, if the safeguards are
there, then
relocate it to that location.
That's OK.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But the
company says the
pipeline is not going to be
rerouted.
The governor says the pipeline
is not going
to be rerouted.
President Obama will soon be out
of office,
and president-elect Trump has
made it very
clear that this pipeline is
going to be built.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II: Well, the
way I look
at it is, as long as the
pipeline isn't under
the river, there's still a
chance, there's
still hope.
And it's unfortunate that this
nation continues
to treat our tribe and tribal
nations around
this country in this manner.
We have every right to protest
this pipeline.
We have indigenous lands, we
have ancestral
lands, we have treaty lands.
The pipeline is 500 feet from
our reservation
border.
And history will show that the
federal government,
the state government has always
built the
economy, has secured energy
independence and
has secured national security
off the backs
of our nations.
And this is another example.
And so whether the government
says, government
-- governor of North Dakota says
it's not
going to be rerouted, whether
Kelcy Warren,
the CEO of Energy Transfer
Partners, say it
won't be rerouted, and whether
the president-elect
says it won't be rerouted, we
still want to
build awareness on the treatment
of our nations,
the first people of this nation,
and how everybody
benefits from the costs that we
paid over
history.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
David Archambault,
chairman of the Standing Rock
Sioux, thank
you very much for being here.
DAVID ARCHAMBAULT II: Yes.
You're welcome.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You can find
all the "NewsHour"'s
coverage of the Dakota standoff
on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks on Trump's
Cabinet picks;
and is it time to end youth
football?
But first: In Cuba, a procession
with Fidel
Castro's ashes is approaching
the city of
Santiago, where the dictator who
died last
Friday began his revolutionary
journey nearly
60 years ago.
In partnership with the Pulitzer
Center on
Crisis Reporting, special
correspondent Nick
Schifrin and producer Zach
Fannin look at
Castro's legacy and the future
of the island,
starting along the route of his
final journey.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The road to Fidel
Castro's
final resting place was lined
with the revolution's
faithful, for whom it's never
too early to
be wrapped in the flag.
With the military that Castro
created circling
overhead and leading the way,
his ashes drove
by into the morning sun.
For more than 55 years, Castro
was Cuba's
indispensable force, and many
here expressed
a sense of loss; 93-year-old
Zoila Andreu
Sain needed help from her
66-year-old daughter,
Ailsa.
They live together on the parade
route.
They were joined by a third
generation, 23-year-old
Giselle Gallego.
This family's revolutionary
faith hasn't faltered.
GISELLE GALLEGO, Cuba (through
translator):
My admiration for Fidel comes
above everything.
He wasn't just a leader for the
Cuban revolution,
but a leader for the world.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The two
matriarchs show off
their favorite photos, a younger
son, Eugenio
(ph), at the commander's side.
Fidel made him the head of a
housing development
program, and provided the family
with opportunities
they have never forgotten.
AILSA NEREY ANDREU, Cuba
(through translator):
Women stopped being domestic
objects and were
given the chance to work, all
thanks to the
revolution and to Fidel.
ZOILA ANDREU SAIN, Cuba (through
translator):
I love Fidel.
I love him very, very, very
much.
He fought for Cuba.
NARRATOR: They had marched right
across the
island in a triumphant progress,
joyfully
acclaimed all the way.
NICK SCHIFRIN: January 1959,
Castro and his
men seized Havana and overthrew
the Batista
dictatorship.
So began the hero's myth.
He'd descended from the
mountains and convinced
people he was Cuba's destined
savior.
For his fans, that origin story
still holds.
ZOILA ANDREU SAIN (through
translator): He
took everything that was bad,
and made it
better.
He will continue to do so from
the cemetery
where he will rest.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But 30 miles
outside of Havana,
Fidel Castro's legacy is not as
universally
positive.
This is Hershey, named after the
American
chocolate baron, today,
population about 3,000.
Castro's 1959 revolution
promised a better
future.
Here, as in many small towns
across Cuba,
the economic promises of the
revolution have
not been fulfilled.
The train used to arrive here
with Cubans
from many towns.
Today, it brings only a few
locals, just enough
to keep 29-year-old Carlos
Gonzalez afloat.
He sells tiny, folded pizzas for
20 cents.
CARLOS GONZALEZ, Cuba (through
translator):
We struggle every day.
I wake up at 3:00 a.m. to be
able to afford
food, afford clothes, and keep
on going.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Garcia's oldest
client is the
city's oldest resident;
92-year-old Amparo
Dejongh was the first person
born here.
Who's this?
That's you?
AMPARO DEJONGH, Cuba: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Wow.
Wonderful.
And what kind of town was
Hershey?
AMPARO DEJONGH (through
translator): It was
conceived to be perfect, in
housing, in education,
in social order.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Her photos show a
model town
created exactly a century ago.
Hershey's sugar mill was one of
the world's
most modern.
After the revolution, Castro
nationalized
the factory and all other
American property.
Eventually, the economy
collapsed.
Today, the factory is a heap of
rust.
Once prosperous streets are
dotted with homes
long abandoned.
Dejongh blames ineffective local
government
officials.
AMPARO DEJONGH (through
translator): The political
machine is very big.
Here, they appoint a leader and
he does whatever
he wants.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Residents are
thankful for
the revolution's positive
advances.
The racial segregation that
Hershey imposed
on its workers has been replaced
with apparent
racial equality.
Residents receive free health
care, and students
get free education.
But, for many, the economic
future remains
bleak.
When you think about 1959 and
you think about
what this country has been
through since then,
do you view the legacy
positively or negatively?
He didn't want to answer that
question.
His fear, says dissident Carlos
Millares Falcon,
is widespread.
What would happen to you if you
criticized
the government publicly?
CARLOS MILLARES FALCON, Cuba
(through translator):
Automatically, they would drive
me to the
headquarters of internal
security very fast.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In his living
room, Falcon
keeps American and European
flags.
He says Cuba lacks Western
freedoms of speech,
participation, and multiple
political parties.
That keeps criticism rare and
the opposition
fractured.
In March in Havana, President
Obama spoke
alongside current President Raul
Castro.
Obama argued that normalizing
relations would
force the Cuban government to
liberalize.
But from January to October this
year, the
government is reported to have
detained 9,125
people, more than quadruple the
2010 number.
CARLOS MILLARES FALCON (through
translator):
The pressure on us has
increased.
I don't think Fidel's death will
create any
policy change.
The government will maintain the
same policy
of zero tolerance.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But 22-year-old
Alejandro Rodriguez
says zero tolerance doesn't mean
zero evolution.
ALEJANDRO RODRIGUEZ, Cuba
(through translator):
For us young people, we do need
a change.
We're tired of the same old,
same old.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Cuba, the
Internet is rare
and expensive.
So he collects the entertainment
people can't
get, and copies it onto hard
drives, called
packets.
They're full of local musicians
who pay to
be in the packet, alongside
illegally copied
TV shows, and bad shark movies.
The packets are delivered by
bike messenger.
Unless the Internet opens, the
packet will
only get more popular, and
Rodriguez predicts
that's not coming anytime soon.
ALEJANDRO RODRIGUEZ (through
translator):
The packet will last.
I don't see an end to it right
now.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In many ways,
Cuba's stuck
in the past.
But people seize whatever
openings they can
find; 80 percent of the country
works for
the government, but, in the last
decade, Jesus
Reyes and half-a-million others
have been
allowed to go private.
He's trained as a nuclear
physicist.
His wife's a biologist, and,
together, their
job was finding a cure for
cancer, but that
only paid each of them $40 a
month.
So while she stayed in science,
he's driving
a taxi.
JESUS REYES, Cuba (through
translator): Unfortunately,
we have an inverted pyramid
here.
The people who give more to
society make less
money, and those who give less
make more.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He and his 1957
Chevrolet Bel
Air can make four or five times
what he made
as a government-paid physicist.
He wishes that wasn't the case.
He still believes in the
revolution's principles,
but he believes that Cuba needs
to change.
JESUS REYES (through
translator): It's one
thing to hold static, like we
are today, without
perfecting or improving, and
it's another
thing to slowly improve.
That's what people like me
aspire to, where
our individual values are
acknowledged.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Castro always
said that revolution
was a process and that change
was inevitable.
But holding onto the
revolution's principles
means that whatever change does
come is likely
going to come slowly.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick
Schifrin
in Havana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to
politics and a
whole week full of Cabinet
picks.
Time to turn to the analysis of
Shields and
Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
And I know you have been paying
very close
attention to every one of these
nominations,
Mark.
And, David, so it's James Mattis
to Defense
this week, Tom Price, the
congressman, to
Health and Human Services, Steve
Mnuchin to
Treasury.
David, what stands out here?
What do you think of what Mr.
Trump is doing?
DAVID BROOKS: I have to say,
he's exceeding
expectations.
Sometimes, during the campaign,
he seemed
to be actively trying to
misgovern.
And here he seems to be to have
an effective
administration.
They're not all the people I
would pick.
But he won the election.
Some of them are not only good
for Trump,
but genuinely good picks.
General Mattis, I think, is in
that.
He's a scholarly man, a good
leader, a man
with subtle foreign policy
views.
Others are experienced, Elaine
Chao, who has
already been.
Other people, Tom Price, are
experienced legislators.
And so they're people who know
their way around
Washington, while I think
representing the
Trump world view.
And so I think, in general, for
those of us
who were a little skeptical of
Trump, it's,
I would say, exceeding
expectations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exceeding
expectations, Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: A little
skeptical?
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Wow.
That's dialing it back.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, I am
pleased, relieved,
and almost thrilled with the
appointment of
General James Mattis as
secretary of defense.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Whoa.
MARK SHIELDS: General Joe
Dunford is the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Marine, former
commandant.
And now General Mattis, former
Marine, so
you can be sure that there will
be a lot of
sniping from the Army, the Navy,
because the
Marines are the smallest force.
But why am I pleased?
Everything that David said about
General Mattis
is true.
He is a scholar.
He's independent.
He's thoughtful.
He's smart.
He's a great leader.
The Marines have a rule, unlike
any other
military branch I know: Officers
eat last,
OK?
That is, no officer eats until
the sergeants,
the corporals, the privates
under his command
have first been fed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you speak
from personal
experience.
MARK SHIELDS: And nobody
embodied that more
than Jim Mattis.
He was very much an enlisted
man's general.
And the one quick anecdote, and
that is, when
General Charles Krulak was
commandant of the
Marine Corps, every Christmas --
this was
in the late '90s -- he and his
wife would
bake cookies for the last couple
weeks before
Christmas.
And he would get up at 4:00 in
the morning
with General Krulak and deliver
them in little
packages to the Marines who were
standing
duty that day, because every
Marine base,
every Marine post has be
somebody standing
duty.
And he showed up at Quantico and
he asked
the Marine lance corporal who
was on duty,
where is the officer of the day
and who it
is?
He said, it's General Mattis,
sir.
He said, no, no, it's not
General Mattis.
I mean, who is the officer of
the day?
And he said, it's General
Mattis, sir.
And up comes Jim Mattis and a
general, brigadier
general, and he is on duty and
he has got
his sword.
And the commandant says, what
are you doing
here?
He said, well, there was a young
lieutenant
who was on duty today, and he
has a wife and
two children.
And I thought it was better that
he have Christmas
with his family.
That's the kind of man he is.
It's the kind of values he's
embodied.
He's independent.
He's strong.
And he will be good for the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wow.
Well, we're off to some high
praise here.
Let's talk about something else
that Donald
Trump did this week.
And that is, the first public
speech he made
since the election, he went to
Indianapolis,
and announced a deal that he's
cut with the
Carrier Corporation, air
conditioners, furnaces,
to save 1,000 jobs, not all the
jobs that
were going to Mexico, but a lot
of them.
What kind of precedent does this
set?
What are we to make of it?
DAVID BROOKS: I agree with Sarah
Palin on
this one.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: She wrote an op-ed
today where
she called it crony capitalism
and a source
of corruption.
And I think that's true.
The job of government is to be a
level playing
field where companies compete
and make money
honestly.
And by rewarding one company
over another,
by getting involved in these
sort of petty
deals, the first thing you're
doing is encouraging
rent-seeking, for companies to
make money
off government, rather than the
honest way.
And the second thing, it's --
and especially
in this administration, it's an
invitation
to corruption.
If you're cutting deals with
company after
company, doing this kind of
deal, that kind
of deal, inevitably, there is
going to be
a quid pro quo.
There is going to be
under-the-table lobbying.
And it's just a terrible
precedent for our
economy and for the
administration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even with the
1,000 jobs?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first of
all, it's a very
expensive way to save 1,000
jobs.
Second of all, Carrier is owned
-- the parent
company is United Technologies,
a defense
contractor, totally dependent on
U.S. government
interests for their well-being.
If we can't lean on these people
and negotiate
a good deal with them, and where
we have to
pay $700,000 in tax credits to
save 1,000
jobs, it's a bad deal, even from
that perspective.
It's very expensive.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
Are you as worried about it?
MARK SHIELDS: No, I'm not as
worried about
it.
I think it is bad public policy.
I think it's a political
masterstroke.
I think Donald Trump raised this
issue during
the campaign.
When it first appeared, when
Carrier showed
the gross insensitivity, where
it was on YouTube,
where they went in and told the
1,000 workers
that their jobs were leaving,
that the company
was leaving, and it was just --
it was abjectly
insensitive to the workers.
And Donald Trump picked that up.
It was part of his prairie
populism of the
time, unlike his Cabinet
appointments to Treasury
and Commerce.
But I think, Judy, there is
1,000 people who
are going to have Christmas who
weren't going
to have Christmas.
And were there deals cut?
Sure.
And have there been deals cut on
crony capitalism
in the past?
Yes.
It's always gone to the company.
And it's been a long time.
I give Barack Obama great credit
for the rescue
of the United States automobile
industry.
It saved hundreds of thousands
of jobs.
But the fact is, we have had
deals cut, and
the jobs have ended up going
elsewhere.
And I think Donald Trump, this
is a masterstroke
that he said he would do
something, he did
it, and it's been a long time
since the president
of the United States has made
that kind of
an announcement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would you
say back?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, first of
all, there will
be 1,000 people who will have
Christmas.
That's true.
But there will be a lot of
people who will
be paying for that.
Second of all, you will have a
less efficient
economy, so there will be less
job creation.
Third, when companies ship jobs
overseas,
they don't like just take the
factory and
then move it abroad.
They gradually do what is in
their economic
best interests, which is to
scale back production
here or flatline it and scale it
up there.
If the economics is still
favoring a job in
Mexico over a job in Indiana,
Carrier will
still be doing it, but they will
be getting
a lot of taxpayer money, and we
will have
a sludgier economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, this
isn't just a
drop in the bucket, in the face
of an enormous
-- enormous economic changes?
MARK SHIELDS: No, of course it
is.
But did he do something that
positively affected
people's lives?
Yes.
Is it a coherent national
macro-policy?
No.
But as a micro-act, it's a very
positive act
politically.
And I think it reflects better
upon him and
his commitment to these people
and their well-being
and their survival than an awful
lot that's
happened in the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we have
been talking
a lot about Donald Trump.
I do want to bring up the
Democrats today,
because this week in the House,
David, they
voted again on their leadership,
Nancy Pelosi
reelected to be the minority
leader, but with
not as large a vote as the last
time.
She won two-thirds against a
challenge from
an Ohio congressman, Tim Ryan.
What's going on with the
Democrats?
You're hearing more of them
speak out and
say, we don't like the kind of
campaign that
Hillary Clinton ran, we have got
to be worried
about things that we weren't
worried about
in this election.
DAVID BROOKS: I don't think
they're that far
along.
Republicans were preparing for a
big defeat
and then reorganization.
Democrats were preparing for
victory.
So I don't think the Democrats
are that far
along on where the party should
go.
But you can see the objection to
Pelosi.
She's -- the top three leaders
in the House
on the Democratic side are all
in their mid-70s.
She's some San Francisco, not
exactly -- if
you're trying to reach Ohio.
And is she a fresh face for the
party in an
era of change?
Well, no.
On the other hand, she's a
really good tactician
and a good legislative leader.
And I can see why she ended up
winning, because
it's a local race.
And they probably wanted
somebody who could
master the craft of legislation.
And, plus, they all owe her to a
great degree.
So, it's a testimony to her
that, even in
an extremely adverse climate,
it's a testament
to what people think of her
skills, I would
say, that she ended up winning,
you know,
still by a reasonably
comfortable margin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you make
of this?
MARK SHIELDS: I think David is
right in his
assessment of Leader Pelosi.
The fact that she's from San
Francisco, if
anything, is a help, in the
sense that you
want a leader who can take tough
positions
and not jeopardize their own
survival.
That's one of the things you
want in a leader.
She has been a very formidable
leader.
She was a great speaker.
But I think for the people --
and it was a
considerable vote.
A third of her caucus voted
against her.
Only 12 people came out publicly
and were
willing to stand up with Tim
Ryan, but, in
private, 64 or 63 came out and
voted in the
secret ballot for him.
If there had been 35 that had
come out, then
maybe there might have been 75
or 80 who had
been so emboldened to vote
outside.
But she did prevail, for the
reason that David
cited.
In addition to that, to put the
folks on Nancy
Pelosi is absolutely ludicrous.
The Democrats have an enormous
problem.
Today, as we sit here, there are
five states
in the United States that have a
Democratic
governor and two houses of the
legislature
controlled by Democrats.
That's the lowest in the
history.
There are 12 fewer Democratic
senators than
there were the day that Barack
Obama was sworn
in.
There are 16 fewer Democratic
governors than
there were the day.
Nobody redistricts state lines
than there
were the day that Barack Obama
was sworn in.
There are 63 fewer House
members.
There are fewer Democratic state
legislators
today in the 50 states than
there have been
at any time in history, at any
time in history.
So, Judy -- ever since 1900, I
should say.
But I look at this and say, the
Democratic
Party is noncompetitive west of
New Jersey,
all the way to Carson City,
Nevada, with the
exception of the blue island of
Illinois and
Latino-strengthened states of
New Mexico and
Colorado.
Other than that, it's red.
And they're not competitive.
And to just say it's Nancy
Pelosi's fault
and that her replacement would
somehow solve
their problems is self-deception
writ large.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, are there
solutions out
there, David?
DAVID BROOKS: It's not her
fault.
I wouldn't say she's the
solution, though.
And so which way does the
Democratic Party
go?
I think it's likely that they
will go in the
Elizabeth Warren direction.
And that may not be stupid.
There may be a populist way to
tap into what
Trump popped into.
But so far that has never
happened.
So far, when they have gone
left, whether
it's Howard Dean or Jesse
Jackson, they have
lost the heartland.
And they have lost people who
are angry at
government, but don't seem to be
angry at
business.
And so going to the center would
violate all
the momentum you feel on the
left, but I do
think there is some case to be
made for it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you saying
that's what
happened in this election, I
mean, in the
2016...
DAVID BROOKS: Well, they
culturally lost.
Part of the problem is simply
Democrats as
individuals, not as a political
party, are
moving to very few places.
And so they're clustering.
And that's just a demographic
problem for
the party.
MARK SHIELDS: When Barack Obama
was reelected
in 2012 with the majority of the
vote in the
country, first president since
Eisenhower
to win a popular majority in
consecutive elections,
he failed to carry a majority of
congressional
districts.
That hasn't happened since 1960.
I mean, so the Democrats are not
competitive
in large swathes of the country.
They're a coastal party.
I think they have become -- and
I think Nancy
Pelosi bears some of the burden
on this -- I
think they have become too
culturally liberal
a party.
I think that there's been a
willingness to
emphasize LGBTQ issues, rather
than working-class
issues of people in declining
incomes and
families falling behind and
Carrier jobs leaving.
I think that's been -- that the
Democrats
have become a party that, quite
honestly,
is more emphasizing the cultural
issues.
And I think that's been to their
disadvantage
in their national appeal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on that note,
maybe the
Democrats will have an autopsy
like the Republicans
had.
MARK SHIELDS: It certainly
helped them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It certainly did.
It did.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: It was a good
autopsy.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will be back
in a moment
with one view on why children
should stop
playing football.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally: As the
college football
season comes to an end, Keith
Strudler, director
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally: As the
college football
season comes to an end, Keith
Strudler, director
of Marist College's Center for
Sports Communication,
shares his ideas about children
on the field.
It's another in our regular
Friday series,
IMHO: In My Humble Opinion.
KEITH STRUDLER, Director, Marist
College Center
for Sports Communication: I
think it's time
we end youth football
altogether.
I'm not talking about the NFL or
college football,
or even high school and middle
school.
I'm talking about
5-through-10-year-olds,
grade school kids, the kids
that, when they
put on shoulder pads, they're
wider than they
are tall.
Let me be clear.
I like youth sports, and I watch
a lot of
football.
I embrace the positive virtues
kids can get
from organized athletics.
So, why get rid of kids
football?
I have got three reasons, and
none of them
have anything to do with
concussions, although
that's a fine reason as well.
For starters, young kids playing
football
is about as natural as pigs
playing piano.
They can do it, but it's forced.
Kids that age barely understand
simple concepts,
like how mom is related to
cousin Jacob or
why you can't have cotton candy
for dinner.
But we're trying to teach them
how the left
tackle covers the blind side in
an I-formation.
For young kids with developing
minds and bodies,
moving and exploring should come
before memorizing
playbooks.
Next, when most kids sign up for
sports, they
want to do two things: touch the
ball and
Next, when most kids sign up for
sports, they
want to do two things: touch the
ball and
score.
In youth football, the first
thing coach tells
most of the team is that you
will never do
In youth football, the first
thing coach tells
most of the team is that you
will never do
either of those things, and, if
you try, someone's
going to throw a yellow flag,
which gets the
whole team in trouble.
It's like making the whole
office work late
because Frank from accounting
faked a sick
day.
Finally, what kinds of lessons
do young kids
learn from playing football?
That boys compete and girls
cheer?
That success comes through brute
force?
Or that life's work is to take
someone's property,
known here as field possession?
I hope that these are fading
constructs in
a collaborative, idea-based
society.
I hope that these are fading
constructs in
a collaborative, idea-based
society.
You could argue these are
problems for older
kids in football as well.
You could argue these are
problems for older
kids in football as well.
But with age comes cognitive
development and
a more nuanced understanding of
the differences
between sports and reality.
A 6-year-old may not realize
that football
is not a metaphor for life.
A 6-year-old may not realize
that football
is not a metaphor for life.
Now, this doesn't mean I could
never get behind
youth football.
Imagine football if everyone
touched the ball,
and most people had a shot at
scoring, where
kids move all game, and boys and
girls play
together.
That's a football I could put my
kids in.
Funny thing, that football
already exists.
Only, in America, we call it
soccer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online: First
lady Jacqueline
Kennedy was known for guarding
her private
life while serving as the public
face of
the White House.
We look at the new
film "Jackie" that aims to shed
light on this
elusive figure.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
On "Washington Week" tonight: a
look at what
we know about the Trump Cabinet
and economic
agenda and the challenges that
Democrats face
in a Republican-led Congress.
That's tonight on most PBS
stations.
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a look at the phenomenon behind
Art Basel,
the enormous, high-end art fair
in Miami.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.